Hydrogen
======================
Hydrogen is a loader for AMD64 kernels. While being loaded itself by any
multiboot 1 compatible boot loader (tested with GRUB2) that supports loading of
ELF64 binaries, it sets up the environment for an AMD64 kernel attached as
a multiboot module. 

When developing operating systems for AMD64 one is faced with lots of legacy
dating back to the roots of X86. Hydrogen is made to handle most of it to hand
the OS developers a clean and mostly legacy-free system.

Ships with a compiled copy of the GRUB2 bootloader (as stage2_eltorito image).
This binary can easily be replaced by any other compilation of GRUB2 that supports
iso9660 and multiboot or any other compatible boot loader.

Also ships with example kernels (grouped by primary language) in examples/. Build
them using *make install* in their respective directory (copies the kernel.bin to
iso/boot/) and run *make run* in the main directory.

Features
----------------------

  - Symmetric Multiprocessing: Hydrogen parses the system's ACPI tables to discover
    installed and enabled processors, boots them into long mode and leaves them
    in a halted state.
  - Multiboot Compatibility: Hydrogen is compatible with multiboot 1 bootloaders
    that are capable of loading ELF64 binaries. That way it profits from the wide
    variety of hardware, file systems and boot procedures that is supported by
    GRUB2 and others.
  - Information Table: Hydrogen gathers the information it can find in ACPI and
    multiboot tables and puts them into a single info structure storing information
    important for a kernel to know about the system (memory layout, number of
    processors, modules).
  - Clean Memory Layout: Hydrogen leaves the memory in a well defined state. No
    need to make assumptions about memory layout anymore.
  - Legacy Initialization: Hydrogen initializes components like the 8259 PIC and
    sets them to a default state that requires no further setup when the
    component is not used or only little in the case it is.
  - ELF64 Support: Pass your kernel as an ELF64 executable file and it is
  	automatically mapped to the right virtual addresses.
  - Configurability: Put a configuration table in your kernel binary to alter
    Hydrogen's default behavior, e.g. an AP entry point or IRQ to interrupt
    vector mappings.

Build Requirements
----------------------
Hydrogen requires the following tools to build:

  - GNU ld (tested version: 2.21.51.0.6)
  - GNU objcopy (tested version: 2.21.51.0.6)
  - mkisofs (tested version: 1.1.11)
  - nasm (tested version: 2.09.07)
  
Hydrogen has been tested using following emulators:

  - bochs (tested version: 2.4.6)
  - qemu-system-x86_64 (tested version: 0.15.1; using qemu-kvm-0.15.1)
  
Limitations
----------------------
Currenty Hydrogen identity maps the first 64GB of physical memory using 2MB
pages. Behaviour on systems with more than 64GB of memory installed is undefined.

Make sure your ELF64 kernel is only loaded into the higher half of the address
space to avoid collisions with memory mapped in the lower half.

How To Use
----------------------
Hydrogen searches for an ELF64 kernel binary as multiboot module with the
cmdline string 'kernel64', loads it into virtual memory and jumps to its entry
point.

Hydrogen is loaded at 0x100000 (the 1MB mark) and reserves 16kB of memory for
code and data, which can be reclaimed by the kernel with no risk. Behind that,
i.e. to 0x104000, all info tables and system structures (like GDT, IDT and paging
structures) are placed (see inc/memory.h and inc/info.h for more details), followed
by the loaded modules, the kernel binary and paging structures. The free_mem_begin
field of the main info table points to the first freely available page in physical
memory.

When the PIC flag is set in the flags field of the info table, the loader has
detected and initialized an 8259 PIC. Its first IRQ vector is set to 0x30 and
all IRQs are masked (even when a modified IRQ to vector map is given in the
config table).

Additionally, Hydrogen initializes all I/O APICs in the system and sets up
the redirections of all global system interrupts that map to ISA IRQs to begin
at vector 0x30 by default (note that I/O APIC and PIC use the same vectors, so
make sure to keep them masked in at least one of them). All redirections are masked.

You can pass a configuration table to Hydrogen by creating a symbol 'hydrogen_config'.
Using the table you can (also see inc/config.asm):

 - Define an entry point for your APs.
 - Alter IRQ to interrupt vector mappings.
 - Unmask a set of IRQs (both only on the I/O APICs, not on the PIC).

Related Work
----------------------
In development of the Hydrogen Loader the project Pure64 [1] by Return Infinity
has been a great inspiration. While serving a quite similar purpose and also
sharing the basic design philosophy, Pure64 is a stage 2 loader and has to care
about loading the kernel from the boot medium itself, which is why to the date
when Hydrogen was started it only supported FAT16 as a file system and did not
support loading from devices other than a hard drive.

Hydrogen has been developed out of the wish to profit from GRUB2's wide support
of hardware, file systems and devices while still not having to care about the
annoying and lengthy setup required for modern AMD64 systems.

The author thanks the Return Infinity team for their great work and the inspiration
that came with it.

[1] http://www.returninfinity.com/pure64.html